Toshanraju Vysyaraju
Professor Morgan
Expository Writing Section JC
8 October 2018
Disruptors in Society
	The word “disruption” is usually used in the negative sense, but many times a disruption can be a very positive thing. A lot of times, society gets too comfortable with life and does not realize that changes need to be made. Fortunately, disruptions wake up society and break its trance. In her article “Project Classroom Makeover”, Cathy Davidson talks about how she, and many others, acted like disruptors in the field of education. Davidson strongly believed more disruptors in education were needed as the education system in America is very outdated. On the other hand, Franklin Foer’s article “Mark Zuckerberg’s War on Free Will” from “World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech” states that disruptors like Mark Zuckerberg should not be supported and action should be taken to protect society from such people. Overall, Davidson has a positive view on disruptors while Foer has negative views. Disruptors should be embraced in society because they promote technology that makes life easier, use different teaching skills in the classroom, and take old ideas and make them new.
	When looking at advancements in America in the last fifty years and comparing how much aspects of our daily lives have changed, education is the most disappointing. Transportation, entertainment, and even clothing has changed so much, yet the way teachers run their classrooms has barely changed. While a lot of schools recently have been moving towards using tools like Google Classroom and Turnitin, many school districts are still refusing to incorporate technology in the classroom. In these school systems, students are taught to do research by looking for books in a library but then they go home and use google to get the same results in less than a second. Schools are wasting time teaching students outdated methods instead of showing them how to use technology to their own advantage. While skills such as the dewey decimal system should still be taught to students even though they are outdated, schools should not keep these topics in the curriculum at the expense of valuable lessons about using technology in the present world. Lessons about old fashioned methods should be taught as a “bonus” if there is space in the syllabus or if there is extra time at the end of the day. However, they should not be the main takeaway from the day. Foer states, “From the moment of the algorithm’s invention, it was possible to see its power, its revolutionary potential. The algorithm was developed in order to automate thinking, to remove difficult decisions from the hands of humans, to settle contentious debates.” (Foer, 63). After all, technology was created to simplify life. The majority of work places in America are using technology on a daily basis as it is much more efficient. Students need to keep up with the real world if they are to survive after their formal schooling and it is the responsibility of schools to incorporate technology into day to day activities. In order to advocate for technological advancements in education, Duke University decided to give every incoming freshman a brand new iPod to see what would happen. Davidson stated, “We would not control the result. This was an educational experiment without a syllabus. No lesson plan,” (Davidson, 50). The most important part of the whole thing was that after they were given their iPods, the students were given free reign over how them used them. Students could use their new tool in any way that they saw fit. After giving the students the iPods and then sitting back and observing the outcome, Davidson said, “They [students] turned the iPods into social media and networked their learning in ways we did not anticipate,” (Davidson, 52). The end result was fascinating. Every student used their iPods in different ways. With access to iPods, students figured out many ways to use the technology for their own betterment. Medical students used them to listen to heart arrhythmias that could not be heard on a regular basis without the audio library that was found on the iPods. Students from the School of Environment interviewed families from a community in North Carolina that had concerns about the lead in the paint used in their houses and schools. They conducted many interviews and at the end of the semester were able to string them all together and published it on the Web. Every student was able to add their own personal touch of creativity and ingenuity to their personal uses of the iPods. By disrupting the regular teaching style at their university, Duke faculty were able to give students access to ground breaking technology and allow them to make their education much easier while preparing them for their futures in the real world.
	Teachers that are disruptors and use innovative ways to teach their students give their students innumerable opportunities for their futures. All throughout public schooling, teachers and faculty members constantly try to teach students that everyone is different and that every person has their own individual personality that defines them. Yet, all these students with “different personalities” are all thrown into the same classroom and a single teacher stands in front of everyone and teaches in a general manner. Every student learns in different ways and it is the responsibility of teachers to get to know their students and figure out ways to teach them individually in the most effective way. Mrs. Inez Davidson, the mother-in-law of Kathy Davidson, used games in the classroom of her schoolhouse in Mountain View in Alberta, Canada and refused “to teach to a test” (Davidson, 65). Mrs. Davidson would use games to test her students on what they had learned that week. “She insisted that everyone had a unique way of learning and believed that to be true of the smartest students as well as the academically weakest” (Davidson, 65). Additionally, writer Seth Godin stated in his post “What You Can Learn from a Lousy Teacher” that “Grades are an illusion, your passion and insight are reality; persistence in the face of a skeptical authority figure is a powerful ability; fitting in is a short-term strategy, standing out pays off in the long run; and if you care enough about work to be criticized, you’ve learned enough for today,” (Davidson, 62). Mrs. Davidson connected to all her students personally and got to know them. She recognized them and treated them as humans and this allowed her to give them the education that they need. As a result of her unique way of teaching, Mrs. Davidson was able to produce many PhD and MD students. She tried to reach the hearts of her students and made learning interesting. By being innovating in the way she ran her classroom, Mrs. Davidson made a difference in the lives of her students.
	Not only do disruptors create brand new ideas such as different ways to teach, they also take older ideas and refurbish them to make them more usable in the world today. They take something that is outdated and they morph it into what would be useful in the present environment. For example, the students at Duke that had access to iPods took the already existing technology and shaped and molded it to fit their personal needs. “To me, this was a conceptual breakthrough: that a commercial product might also be susceptible to consumer customization, a way of extending the infinitely changeable open-source properties of the Internet itself to a product with a far more fixed, finite identity. It was a hybrid of old and new thinking” (Davidson, 53). What was on the market as just a simple audio device was much more in the hands of students. They added their own personal touch to the product to make them so much more than what they were advertised for. Overall, the world is filled with old ideas that do not really fit in with the times anymore. “Over the last two hundred years, the West has been… throw[ing] out the bum politicians and replace[ing] them with engineers” (Foer, 61). These engineers are much more beneficial in these times. Engineers are taking over and changing ideas in the world to be more in line with technological advances. Zuckerberg described his role in society by saying, “You know, I’m an engineer, and I think a key part of the engineering mindset is this hope and this belief that you can take any system that’s out there and make it much, much better than it is today. Anything, whether it’s hardware, or software, a company, a developer ecosystem, you can take anything and make it much, much better,” (Foer, 63). This engineering mentality is what is needed in society today. Zuckerberg, for example, realized that communication between people far away had not changed much since telephones and email were invented. Therefore, he created Facebook to change communication completely. He took already existing ideas such as Myspace and innovative on top of them to create his own social media platform. On his platform, old friends and family were able to easily keep in touch and new friends could be made. Zuckerberg completely changed the game with his invention of Facebook. Engineers like Zuckerberg are disruptors that are good for society and should be embraced. 
	Disruptors in society have many benefits and should be embraced. Technology makes life much easier and many disruptors are bringing technology into the classroom. Disruptors also push for using different teaching skills in the classroom to help students better understand the information rather than just teaching towards a test. Many disruptors are engineers who take old ideas and products and change them to better fit the needs of society today. Overall, disruptors have benefits that guide people through their lives and modernize the world in a positive way and should therefore be embraced by society.




















Works Cited
Davidson, Kathy. Project Classroom Makeover. 2011.
Foer. Franklin. World Without Mind: the Existential Threat of Big Tech. Penguin Books,
2018.
