Toshanraju Vysyaraju
Professor Morgan
Expository Writing Section JC
24 September 2018
Authenticity of Life on the Internet
	You only live once. A person’s one life should be led authentically. One’s actions should be equivalent to his or her beliefs. However, Facebook and other social media has infected the lives of everyone in today’s world. At the end of the day, people look at at the number of likes they received on their latest Facebook post or the number of views on their Snapchat story in order to determine how successful their day was, rather than how much they actually accomplished. In “Mark Zuckerberg’s War on Free Will” from “World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech”, the author Franklin Foer uncovers the real truth behind Mark Zuckerberg’s actions and attempts to shows Facebook’s true intentions. While Facebook claims to create an environment of authenticity on their platform, the reality is that the platform, along with all the other people using it, results in a space where posts are manufactured for the maximum number of likes, conversations are fabricated, and people cannot be their genuine selves.
	An individual can only lead an authentic life when they stop fearing judgement from others in their life. Life is always riddled with people that constantly judge you. Especially on social media, where people watch your every action with a microscope, a genuine life is nearly impossible. On social media, a person can be whoever they want to be without consequence. Especially on Facebook, catfishing is very common. Catfishing occurs when a person creates a new identity for themselves on social media and attempts to lure people into romantic relationships. While this is an extreme example, small scaled catfishing occurs all the time. On the other hand, Facebook also creates an environment that forces people to be extra careful and present a publicly acceptable version of themselves. Facebook is a public platform where people without accounts can access other people’s profiles with no trace of ever seeing it. This also allows companies to check the Facebook pages of people they are in the process of hiring. If employers see something that is not appropriate or does not match with the morals of their company, they may reevaluate the candidate or sometimes even stop the hiring process all together. Due to a fear of this happening, many people filter what they post on social media. A lot of thought actually goes into a post due to the fear of being judged. Most people don't show their true selves because they are afraid of rejection or judgement from peers. Feor states, “The theory holds that the sunshine of sharing our intimate details will disinfect the moral mess of our lives. Even if we don’t intend for our secrets to become public knowledge, their exposure will improve society. With the looming threat that our embarrassing information will be broadcast, we’ll behave better” (Foer, 60). Facebook is attempting to improve society by removing authenticity of life on social media. The ideal form of society is where everyone lives a real life, but Facebook wants to introduce the fear of people judging into the picture and believes that this will result in a better society. As long as there is any sort of outside influence, such as the worry of people judging a post, social media like Facebook will never be authentic.
	Conversations about real life problems and major world events are commonplace on Facebook. However, it is not a private conversation. It is a discussion that is watched by many others. Usually the conversation consists of two people actually talking and everyone else is watching as it goes on. Unfortunately, the spectators usually like and add reactions to the comments and therefore influence the actual discussion. Facebook recently introduced a new feature that allows users to add a reaction to comments. Foer believes "Facebook is constantly tinkering with how its users view the world" (Foer, 74). Facebook wants its platform to be a place where real problems and issues of the real world are discussed by its users. Facebook does so by “tinkering with how its users view the world - [Facebook is] always tinkering with the quality of news and opinion that it allows to break through the din, adjusting the quality of political and cultural discourse in order to hold the attention of users for a few more beats” (Foer, 74). Facebook wants its users to get involved in conversations by adding reactions. As a result, participants of the conversation will change their words to match the views of the people watching from a distance. By doing so, the participants will satisfy the spectators and earn their likes and positive reactions. Most people do not show their true selves because they are afraid of rejection or judgement from peers. Rather than being genuine, the participators of the discussion decide to be inauthentic and satisfy the observers. In the end, people will always say things that they do not actually believe and act like they support the popular opinion solely for the likes and positive reactions, and conversations on Facebook will not be authentic.
	Social media is used as an escape from one’s own life. Life is always filled with ups and downs. It has its wonderful moments, but those unfortunately come with some negative times. However, people only showcase the positive parts of their lives. On days like weddings or parties, people try to show off and they post all of their happy pictures on Facebook. However, when they are having a bad day, people tend not to post anything at all. Social media has become a way to show others the very best version of one self. In order to maintain that perfect image on the internet, people will pick and choose what to post. Rather than being authentic and showing others both their ups and downs, people put on a mask of happiness and laughter and discard everything negative. This constant sugar coating of everything results in an inauthentic life that is published onto social media. The main reason for all of this is because people have a need to impress others and on social media, this is measured by the number of likes and positive comments. The more the likes and positive reactions the post receives, the happier the person who posted becomes. Due to this, most people will filter and edit pictures and twist the truth slightly just to entice more people into liking their post. This results in people having two different identities, one that is lived in the real life that is authentic and one on that is portrayed on social media that is filled with perfect smiling pictures at fun events. Mark Zuckerberg, the CEO and founder of Facebook, says, "having two identities for yourself is an example of a lack of integrity" (Foer, 61). Even the CEO of Facebook knows that people live a different life on social media than in real life. Being truthful to yourself is a crucial part of living an authentic life. Facebook is not an authentic version of a person’s life because it only portrays the best version of the person.
	Facebook and other social media attempt to provide an environment that allows their users to be able to portray an authentic reflection of their personal lives. However, they have not yet succeeded. On Facebook, there is too much judgement from other people. Additionally, a person can be whoever they want to be on social media, without any consequences. Conversations are also not genuine on Facebook because the spectators of the conversations influence the discussion by adding reactions. Lastly, people try too hard to portray the best versions of themselves on Facebook in order to attempt to impress others as well as use it as an escape from their own life. Zuckerberg said, “To get to this point where there’s more openness - that’s a big challenge. But I think we’ll do it,” (Foer, 61). Facebook is definitely on the way to being a platform where people are authentic, but they have not quite gotten there yet.



















Works Cited
Foer. Franklin. World Without Mind: the Existential Threat of Big Tech. Penguin Books,
2018.
