Toshanraju Vysyaraju
Professor Morgan
Expository Writing Section JC
25 October 2018
The Inevitable Consequences
	Success is the end goal of any venture in life. People work all their life to succeed in their field of work, students study hard to succeed at their schools, and businesses operate to succeed against their competition. However, with success comes unwanted consequences. Franklin Foer, the author of “Mark Zuckerberg’s War on Free Will” from “World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech”, discusses the Facebook’s journey to success, which was filled with many unfavorable outcomes. Kathy Davidson criticizes the current education system in her article “Project Classroom Makeover”. Rick Wartzman shows how Walmart mistreats its employees in his article “The End of Loyalty: The Rise and Fall of Good Jobs in America”. Unfortunately, the pressure to succeed will always be coupled with undesirable consequences, which can be overcome through an improved education system that incorporates technology to help every student succeed.
The United States, in general, tends to prefer a standardized mentality when dealing with large numbers of people such as businesses and schools. While in a few cases, standardization leads to quick success, it has many unintended consequences. In big businesses, the role of a manager is to make decisions that will affect the day to day operations of a company or organization. However, it is very difficult to make a decision that satisfies everyone, especially with larger companies. Walmart uses a one-size-fits-all management style, where all Walmart stores throughout the country are managed in the same way, regardless of outside factors. For the managers, this style is much easier as it does not require one-on-one contact with employees. Instead, rules are set by the Walmart head office and all the branches have no choice but to follow the regulations. Unfortunately, this does not bode well for the employees. Barbara Ehrenreich recounted her experiences working at Walmart: “Our bright blue vests bear the statement ‘At Walmart our people make the difference.’ Underneath those vests, though, there are real-life charity cases, maybe even shelter dwellers,” (Wartzman, 333). While workers at Walmart put on their bright blue vests and smile at customers, many of them are unhappy. Rather than worrying about the welfare of their employees, Walmart simply pays them the lowest amount that they can legally get away with. Nevertheless, Walmart employees cannot leave their jobs, regardless of how they are treated, because they are dependent on the job. Similarly, students, much like employees, must learn to cope with the unintended consequences of a standardized education methodology. The school system in the United States is very dysfunctional and students are the ones that are negatively affected by this in the long run. Cathy Davidson, when discussing this issue, states, “Our standardized education not only bores kids but prepares them for jobs that no longer exist as they once did. Attention blindness again. Our one-size-fits-all education model focuses steadily and intently on the past,” (Davidson, 62). Every student is different and has an individual personality. Throughout elementary and middle school, teachers constantly teach students that everyone is different and that every person has their own individuality that defines them. Yet, all these students with “different personalities” are all thrown into the same exact classroom and a teacher stands in front of everyone, teaching in a general manner. Every student learns in different ways and it is the responsibility of teachers to get to know their students and figure out an effective way to teach them individually. While the one-size-fits-all mentality may work for the few students that do fit into a cookie cutter stereotype, most students do not, and these students are not being properly taught. The teachers that have abandoned normalization in the classroom produce completely different outcomes when working with students. For example, Mrs. Inez Davidson, Cathy Davidson’s mother-in-law, was a school teacher in Mountain View in Alberta, Canada and she refused to give up on any student. With more highly qualified teachers like Mrs. Davidson, the school system could move away from standardization and toward an education system that goes beyond standardized testing, therefore leaving no students behind. This way, students who become workers will not be stuck being treated poorly as a result of managers who make self-fulfilling decisions without considering the ramifications.
The majority of work places in America are using technology on a daily basis as it is much more efficient than a paper-based old school system. Throughout history, jobs have changed drastically. In the 1700s, farming was the main source of income and after the industrial revolution, factories took over. In today’s age, technology is entering every aspect of life and the workplace has once again drastically changed. Foer states, “From the moment of the algorithm’s invention, it was possible to see its power, its revolutionary potential. The algorithm was developed in order to automate thinking, to remove difficult decisions from the hands of humans, to settle contentious debates.” (Foer, 63). After all, technology was created to simplify life. As a result of the workplace becoming centered around technology, the education system is pushing towards a model of academia that is also focused on technology usage. However, change is very difficult to bring about. Because the teachers are unwilling to change their teaching methods, students are suffering as their education is lacking in vital skills. Davidson demonstrates, “Their [students’] schools hadn’t changed much, but at home, online, they were already information searchers. They had learned by googling,” (Davidson, 49). Students are trying to learn how to use technology by themselves even though it is the duty of teachers to teach those valuable skills. While students may be able to slowly self teach themselves these skills, they should not have to. Schools should focus on teaching students how to use technology to their advantage when learning. In school, students are taught to do research by looking for books in a library but then go home and use google to get similar result from non scholarly sources in less than a second. Schools should get rid of outdated teaching methods such as the Dewey decimal system and instead show them how to use technology such as the library’s online database from home. Fortunately, many schools are taking steps towards change. For example, Duke decided supply to their incoming freshman class with iPods for them to use in any way they saw fit. This produced amazing results where students were much more prepared for their futures in the real world. Slowly but surely, the country’s education system is moving towards the standards of technology that coincide with the workplace expectations.
One of the many unintended consequences of the pressure to succeed is being “stuck” in a cycle of poverty, when people that are born into poverty are unable to achieve better jobs. For example, many people are forced to work at Walmart because they do not have the education levels to work elsewhere. According to Wartzman, Walmart does not offer good salary or benefits that allow employees to take proper care of themselves. Due to the lack of money, they must struggle to achieve things that others that are better off may find to be easily achievable. The only way for these employees to get a better job is if they become more educated. The education system, while it is improving slowly, has not fully reformed yet. Only the top notch schools have made steps towards integrating technology into their curriculum. While Duke may be giving iPods to its entire freshman class, most schools do not have the money and resources to do so. Unfortunately, the top schools that do have the capability to incorporate technology are very expensive and former Walmart employees are unable to afford this advanced education. Therefore, they are stuck attending a school that may be lacking in technological accessibility and they will not receive an education that is required for them to work for a tech company such as Facebook. This leaves them with very few other options besides working at a low-wage company like Walmart. Without the education to give them opportunities to work at high paying jobs, they are essentially trapped in their unsatisfying jobs. This cycle of poverty is caused by the unintended consequences of low paying jobs and a poor education system. As a result of unmodernized teaching, only upper class people are able to afford a proper education. Additionally, due to low paying jobs, people that are in the lower class can only afford a cheap education that does not fully prepare them for the real world.
Success rarely comes without any unfavorable outcomes. If left unchecked, these problems will only grow bigger and bigger. Facebook and the education system are gradually beginning to make subtle changes to fix their problems, whereas Walmart is continuing to treat their employees terribly. In the eyes of the public, Walmart is a successful company. However, the truth always comes out. Facebook attempted to hide its privacy issues for a long time but it was eventually leaked to the public. Fortunately, Facebook is moving past this by making amends and moving towards positive change. While there will always be unfavorable outcomes when it comes to the pressure to succeed, change is the solution. The consequences are unavoidable but by ignoring the problem at hand, the problem just gets worse. However, by working towards change, these obstacles can be conquered and the journey to success will be much smoother.

Works Cited
Davidson, Kathy. Project Classroom Makeover. 2011.
Foer. Franklin. World Without Mind: the Existential Threat of Big Tech. Penguin Books,
2018.
Wartzman, Rick. End Of Loyalty: the Rise and Fall of Good Jobs in America. Public Affairs,
2018.
