Toshanraju Vysyaraju
Professor Morgan
Expository Writing Section JC
3 December 2018
Uncontrollable Futures
	As a young child, everyone always feels as if they have no control over their own lives. At home, their parents are in charge and at school, their teachers are in charge. Even as they grow up, people are always at the mercy of other people, whether it be a boss or a doctor. Malcolm Gladwell talks about how little influence a person has on their own lives in his article, “The Power of Context: Bernie Goetz and the Rise and Fall of New York City Crime.” Gladwell discusses the Power of Context, Stickiness, and the Law of the Few to provide evidence for his claim. Cathy Davidson, in her article “Project Classroom Makeover,” talks about how much students are influenced by teachers and other students. Rebecca Solnit explains the tragic story of Alejandro Nieto and how the decisions of others had a major effect on his own life in her article “Death by Gentrification.” By using Gladwell’s three main theories and pairing them with the ideas of Davidson  and Solnit, I argue that individuals are not in control of their own futures.
	When school children get in trouble, a very common excuse they give is “everyone else is doing it, why can’t I?” While this may seem like a very childish response, there is a lot of truth behind it. In reality, there is a lot of evidence that shows that the actions of others psychologically influences the decisions of a person. Gladwell discusses a specific part of the Power of Context called the Broken Windows theory. The Broken Windows theory states that when a person sees a bunch of broken windows, they will most likely also pick up a brick and break a window. It is a person’s decision to throw a brick at a window, but the decision can be traced back to the person seeing all of the other broken windows and therefore thinking that it is okay to also break a window. Because there is no evidence that the previous people that threw the bricks were reprimanded, the person unconsciously assumes that they, too, will get away without any consequences. This same phenomenon can be seen with young school children. One student’s attention may begin to stray away from the teacher or the task at hand, and, seeing this go unnoticed by the teacher, other students think that it is alright to not pay attention and they too will become distracted. Just because one student’s mistake was overseen by the teacher, the problem spreads like a virus and “infects” all the other students in the class. In the end, the students that were distracted are not actually at fault because they did not consciously choose to become distracted, they were just strongly influenced by the other distracted individuals around them. This infectious virus of not paying attention is very similar to stickiness, which can be seen with reactions to San Francisco police.
Gladwell’s Stickiness theory proves that the actions of others influence one’s future. According to Gladwell, a sticky idea is an idea which may seem small or unimportant at first, that is actually very unforgettable and subconsciously pushes a person to take action. In San Francisco, a general fear of police officers was a sticky idea to the common citizens. For example, Antonio Theodore, the star witness for Alejandro, when asked why he had not come forward earlier, stated, “Just think: it would be hard to tell an officer that I just saw fellow officers shooting up somebody. I didn’t trust the police,” (Solnit, 8). The idea that the police are all-powerful sticks with them and strongly limits their future. A citizen’s unwillingness to tell the truth in front of the cops shows that they are afraid of the justice system, which means that, even in times of need, they will not turn two the government for legal help. If a person is afraid of the justice system, they would never try to receive judicial justice. For example, even if a person’s landlord is being unfair and is clearly breaking the law, he or she would not try and sue the landlord because of a distrust of the judicial system. This means that they lose the choice to sue and therefore lose the freedom of making decisions. America is a free country and a huge reason for that is the judicial system where all people are treated equally without any bias. However, when the fear of police is put into the equation, people begin to be treated less fairly and therefore the judicial system is no longer impartial which means that the people lose freedom.
	Environment plays a huge role the future of individuals. Throughout all of Gladwell’s article, it can be clearly seen that environment plays a huge role in people’s decisions. The environment limits people’s choices for the future. Poor environment results in people having fewer opportunities while a rich environment results in people having many opportunities. This is because the environment always trumps people’s choices. For many students in today’s day in age, technology is a new edition to the environment of a classroom. In school systems where technology is mandatory, students do not have the choice of whether or not they want to use technology. Some students work better with a pen and paper, but they are forced to used technology. For example, at Duke, many professors added iPods to their syllabus so that every student in the class had to use the iPods. While this is in the favor of those students that thrive with technology at their disposal, students that would rather work without technology are at a disadvantage. The iPods are introduced to help all of the students, but not everyone wants to use them. Even in college, when students are paying for their education, they do not have a choice of how to learn. Even if they would rather work without technology, they lack the choice of doing so, and this could result in lower grades and, in turn, will negatively affect their future. While technology has the potential to help everyone, it will help the privileged more. Those who grow up with access to technology, compared to those who are not, will inevitably be able to work with iPods and similar instruments much better in college. Those that are familiar with an iPod before college are essentially better off compared to those who are exposed to this technology for the first time in college. However, whether or not a child is brought up in a rich environment is not the child’s decision. Children do not have the choice of where they grow up, it is decided by their parents and other external factors. If the parents decide to live in a rich, all white community, the children will be put into a school system that likely has a lot of funding and they will exit their formal schooling being very prepared for the world. However, the parents may decide to live in a diverse community. In general, a majority of the population will live in a poor, diverse community as they tend to be cheaper. When children grow up in a cheaper area, they go through a weaker education system. A weaker education system means students will not learn as much and will be less prepared for the outside world. Many times, a poor community will have a huge influx of rich people that make the area much more expensive as a result of gentrification. When a diverse community becomes gentrified, the students that did not learn much in the previously weak education system will not be able to survive in an expensive town and will likely have to move away. This will result in many negative consequences because they do not have experience with it. These negative consequences that could strongly affect a person’s life can be traced back to the person’s childhood and what type of community their parents decided to raise their children in. These newly rich communities are a result of gentrification. Gentrification results in huge environmental changes that are out of the hands of the native residents. The people that are already living there did not invite the new comers, which means that it was not their decision to change the environment. However, it is the choice of the people that chose to move to the area and gentrify it.
While environment does shape many individuals, some individuals have the power to shape the environment. Many people do not have a choice. Students do not have a say, they have to use the technology that is forcefully given to them. Additionally, native residents of San Francisco do not have a choice of stopping gentrification, they must either adapt or move out of the community. However, a small number of people do have a choice and these people fit in the Law of the Few. Gladwell’s theory of the Law of the Few states that one small group or individual can invoke action or change indirectly. The rich people that move into San Francisco have the power to change the environment, the future of the city, and their lives. Because the rich have the power to change the environment, the native residents, in turn, do not have this power. Native residents of San Francisco that are poor do not have the power to make decisions and their future is bad. The rich people that move into San Francisco have control over their own lives. As a matter of fact, even when the poor deviate from the standards set by the rich, the rich are able to take actions in order to enforce standardization on the poor that in turn have negative repercussions for the poor. In San Francisco, the rich had a preconceived notion of what the park should look like. Alejandro did not fit that standard because he was wearing a red cap that reminded people of a gang. Because he does not fit in with the standardization of the park, Alejandro is considered an outlier. As a result of standardization, as described by Davidson, those who do not fit the cookie cutter stereotype, such as Alejandro, are left behind and are forced to face consequences. Unfortunately, because he did not fit the standards set by the rich in San Francisco, Alejandro was unfairly given the ultimate consequence.
Malcolm Gladwell argues that people do not have control over their own lives and that other external factors are what determine the actions of individuals. As a matter of fact, evidence for Gladwell’s claims can be seen in the work of Cathy Davidson and Rebecca Solnit. The Broken Windows theory shows how students are easily distracted by each other. Moreover, Gladwell’s Stickiness theory perfectly describes people’s fear of police officers in San Francisco. Lastly, it can be seen, through the iPod experiment at Duke and the gentrification of San Francisco, that environment plays a huge role in a person’s decisions. However, while most people do not have a lot of control over their lives, some people do. Those with power can change their predetermined futures. In this case, power is defined by money; the rich can shape their own future along with the futures of those who are not rich. While Gladwell’s theory of powerlessness over our futures may be true for most people, those who are rich can inevitably change their futures.

Works Cited
Davidson, Kathy. Project Classroom Makeover. 2011.
Gladwell, Malcolm. The Tipping Point. Little, Brown and Company, 2000.
Solnit, Rebecca. Death by Gentrification. 2016.
