A huge part of who I am is the way I was brought up. My family has shaped the individual who am today the most. Having my parents as role models, I was able to always have someone to look up to and idol. My parents taught me the rights and wrongs of life and it was because of their advice that I was able to get through the hardships of life. Every parent is different. Some parents are very strict, others liberal. Some are involved and some are detached. The roles of family members play a huge part in a person’s life, especially in their upbringing. My mannerisms and personality traits may be learned or inherited from my family which is why they are a part of who I am. I am unfortunate have had two healthy parents who have been there to coach me through my life. Coaching “involves mutual respect and reciprocity. Effective coaches care about and learn from those with whom they work...They grow from the relationship as well.” (Shankman, Allen, and Haber-Curran, 2015, p. 140). I am blessed to have parents who do respect and care about my well being, making them my most favorable coaches. Effective coaches build effective leaders.

But it is unfair to myself to say I am an exact replication of my parents because I am not. I offer something different and my personality and interests make me different. For example, I have hobbies that my parents aren’t interested in, and vice versa. I feel differently about specific topics than they do and this makes me the individual I am. When I feel passionately about something I hold a hard stance on it. My unique capabilities set me apart and give me the competitive advantage and that is of being different. I could be whoever others want me to be but I am a firm believer of staying true and authentic to myself. This is extremely valuable for any leader because they shouldn’t fall into the pressure of ever compromising themselves. 

There is a reason why jobs who are hiring look for individuals with a lot of experience. Work experience shapes people into the employee they are. One doesn’t just stop learning after their first job. After day, there is a new thing or two to be learned and this really helps individuals develop. No job is an easy job or else it wouldn’t really be a job. There are many successes as well as hardships that individuals may go through in their careers but they learn a great deal from both. I wouldn’t be anything without my experiences. I have been put in situations that I would have never imagined myself to be in and these experiences made me learn more about my own self. I wouldn’t have any stories to tell or anything to relate to. My experiences help me make better decisions for next time or allow me to applaud myself for doing something when I was first dealt with it. Some obstacles could really get in the way of our success but as the book says, “We must learn how to come back from these experiences better, stronger, and even smarter. Resilience is a cornerstone of healthy self-esteem.” (Shankman, Allen, and Haber-Curran, 2015, p. 65). My memories and experiences teach me lessons on how to remain confident. This would help be become a successful leader and learn from my past mistakes.

All of my identities are all facets that would help me as I am in the company of others. The values and customs that were taught by my parents allow me to react in ways that are acceptable and appropriate. My own identity allows me to remain calm in stressful situations and I am able to be collected and I don’t act out. My experiences keep my grounded because I have seen the flip side of certain situations and they inspire me to act respectfully with others. I do have my faults, but I tend to appreciate my strengths as much as I can and helps me remain confident. 